## PennCNV

### Installation

To download and install PennCNV, please follow the detailed instructions (including trouble shooting) at the [page](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/user-guide/install/). For more information about PennCNV, please refer to their original [PennCNV website](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/).

After installation, set up environment variable PENNCNV: `export PENNCNV='/path/to/penncnv'`

### Analysis workflow

Note: 

- PennCNV was originally designed to sequentially analyze one sample at a time. Please refer to [PennCNV website](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/) for how to run PennCNV in a sequential way. Here, we provide scripts to run the analysis on multiple samples in parallel via job submitting system (one sample per job) in a cluster environment. 

- In the following steps (2) and (3), the scripts regarding job submission embraced by "##<<<... ##>>>..." in the scripts need to be specified by the users based on the system the users are using.

We run PennCNV analysis with the following 5 steps:

#### (1) Prepare SNP.pfb and SNP.gcmodel files

#### (1.1) compile pfb (population frequency of B allele) file
```sh
perl ${PENNCNV}/bin/compile_pfb.pl \
-snpposfile ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF/SNP_pos.txt \
-listfile ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/list_pfb.txt \
-output ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.pfb
```

Note:

  - For more information about pfb file, please refer to the [page](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/user-guide/input/#pfb-population-frequency-of-b-allele-file).

  - `SNP_pos.txt`: generated by `finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF.pl` in the [initial step](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV#prepare-chromosome-wise-lrr-and-baf-matrices-for-cnv-genotyping).

  - `list_pfb.txt`: the users need to prepare a text file that contains a list of full path to signal files in `{WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data` generated by `finalreport_to_PennCNV.pl` in the [initial step](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV#prepare-data-for-individual-cnv-callers), one per line. The pfb file compiled from only a few samples is not valid -- at least about 100 samples (e.g. one 96-well plate of samples) are needed. Based on our experience, if the sample size of the projects is very large, the users do not need to use signal files from all samples. Instead, a subset of 300 to 500 samples from unrelated subjects are good enough to estimate PFB (population frequency of B allele) for the project. Please put the prepared `list_pfb.txt` in the directory `${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux`.

  - The `SNP.pfb` will not only be used by PennCNV but also employed by ensembleCNV for [CNV genotyping](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV#4-cnv-genotyping-for-each-cnvr). 


#### (1.2) compile gcmodel file for GC content ajdustment

```sh
perl ${PENNCNV}/bin/cal_gc_snp.pl \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/gc5Base_hg19.txt.sorted \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.pfb \
-output ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.gcmodel
```

Note: 

- For more information about gcmodel file, please refer to the [page](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/user-guide/input/#gcmodel-file).

- The `gc5Base_hg19.txt.sorted` (take hg19 for example) is generated based on UCSC Genome Browser annotation file (http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/database/gc5Base.txt.gz). Despite the file name, it actually contains GC content per 5120bp. If you need GC annotation file for other genome assembly, please download it from the corresponding directory names. After downloading `gc5Base.txt.gz` (put in `${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux`) and unzipping the file, then sort this file such that chromosome and positions are sorted.
```sh
sort -k 2,2 -k 3,3n \
<${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/gc5Base.txt \
>${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/gc5Base_hg19.txt.sorted
```

#### (2) Run PennCNV for each sample in parallel (through job submitting system on cluster)

Note: 

- In `step.2.run.PennCNV.jobs.R`, the scripts regarding job submission embraced by "##<<<... ##>>>..." need to be specified based on your system.

- For more information about CNV calling by PennCNV, please refer to the [page](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/user-guide/test/).

```sh 
Rscript ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/step.2.run.PennCNV.jobs.R \
--penncnv ${PENNCNV} \                                  ## direct to ${PENNCNV}/bin/detect_cnv.pl
--data ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data \      ## generated with finalreport_to_PennCNV.pl
--wkdir ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results \  ## output directory
--pfb ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.pfb \
--gcmodel ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.gcmodel \
--hmm ${PENNCNV}/lib/hhall.hmm
```

When the analysis is completed, there will be subfolders named after sample IDs, each for one sample respectively, created in the directory `${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results/res`. Within each sample subfolders, two files will be generated:
- `<Sample_ID>.log`: log file generated by `detect_cnv.pl`, information from which will be retrieved to generated sample-level summary statistics (see step (5) below). 
- `<Sample_ID>.rawcnv`: raw CNV calls made by `detect_cnv.pl`.

#### (3) Check job status and resubmit failed jobs

Note: In `step.3.check.PennCNV.jobs.R`, the scripts regarding job submission embraced by "##<<<... ##>>>..." need to be specified based on your system.

```sh
Rscrip ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/step.3.check.PennCNV.jobs.R \
--penncnv ${PENNCNV} \                                  ## direct to ${PENNCNV}/bin/detect_cnv.pl
--data ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data/ \     ## generated with finalreport_to_PennCNV.pl
--wkdir ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results \  ## output directory
--pfb ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.pfb \
--gcmodel ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.gcmodel \
--hmm ${PENNCNV}/lib/hhall.hmm
```
This step checks if the jobs submitted for each sample in step (2) are successfully completed and resubmits failed jobs if there is any.


#### (4) Combine PennCNV results (.rawcnv and .log files) from each sample
```sh
perl ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/step.4.combine.PennCNV.res.pl \
--in_dir ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results/res \
--out_dir ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results
```
This script screens `.log` and `.rawcnv` files for all samples generated in steps (2) and (3), and combines them. When this step is completed, there will be two files generated in the directory `${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results`:

- `CNV.PennCNV.log`: combined log file of the `.log` files from all samples.

- `CNV.PennCNV.rawcnv`: combined raw CNV calls of the `.rawcnv` files from all samples.

#### (5) Merge closely adjacent CNVs and generate final results
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/step.5.clean.PennCNV.res.R \
--penncnv ${PENNCNV} \                                  ## direct to installation directory ${PENNCNV}
--input ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results \
--pfb ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data_aux/SNP.pfb
```

This script is a wrapper to run three perl scripts in PennCNV package:

- `${PENNCNV}/bin/clean_cnv.pl`: merge adjacent CNVs which are close to each other. Please refer to the [page](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/user-guide/annotation/#merging-adjacent-cnv-calls) for details.

- `${PENNCNV}/bin/convert_cnv.pl`: convert the CNV calls in `.rawcnv` format to the tab-delimited table.

- `${PENNCNV}/bin/filter_cnv.pl`: extract sample-level summary statistics from log file.

When the analysis is completed, you will find two files, which will be used by ensembleCNV, in the directory `${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results`:

- `CNV.PennCNV_new.txt`: CNV calls of all samples.
- `CNV.PennCNV_qc_new.txt`: sample-level summary statistics.

